in this video
Let us learn how to represent the disjoint set
data structure in an array
First let us take 10 elements from number 0 to
9 and assume each element as a unique subset to
represent it in the array let us create an array of
size 10
First let us initialise The array to minus one
here minus indicates that it is the head or root
element of this subset and one indicates that each subset
has only one element
For example this particular index indicates that two is the
root element of this subset
And this subset has only one element that is two
Here all indices
are marked as minus one
So it means every element is a unique subset
Now let us perform the union operation on elements one
and two
Union means we need to connect the two sets for
that
We need to pick one of the elements as the
root node here
Both indices one and two have values as minus one
which means both subsets has only one element
So we can pick any node as root let us
pick two as a root node and connect one with
two to connect one with two just marked the value
of index one
As two now Index one has a positive value which
means it is no longer a root element
Index one has a valued two
It means that parent of Element one is two
In other words Element one is connected with element two
Now we need to update the root element here
Index two is the root element
Now it has two elements
Numbers one and two so we can mark it as minus two
Here minus indicates that it is the root node of
this subset and two indicates that this subset has two
elements that is elements one and two here the important
thing to notice
A negative number indicates that the particular element is the
root element and positive element indicates that the particular element
is not a root element whereas it is connected with
some other element
Now let us perform Union on Elements three and four
here both indices three and four have values
as minus one
Hence both the elements are root elements and each subset
has only one element
So let us pick number four as the root node and
connect element three with four for that
just mark
The value four in index three
Now we have connected element three with four
Now we need to update the parent node
Here Index four is the parent node
It has a value as minus one
But this subset now has two elements
So change it to minus two and that's it
Now let us union the elements four and seven here
The value of index four is minus two and the
value of Index seven is minus one
We need to pick the parent node among these two
elements
Since Element four has the higher value we can pick
element four as the parent node here we're choosing the
parent not based on its weight so we can call
this weighted union
So as usual connect seven with four by updating the
index seven value as four and then we need to
update the value of parent node which is four here
Subset four has two nodes already
Now we have added one more node so change it
to minus three here minus indicates that index four is a
parent node and three indicates that the subset has three
elements
That is four three and seven now let us Union The
elements three and eight The value of index eight is minus
one
Since it has a negative number Element eight is the
parent node
But the value of index three is four it is
not a parent node as it has a positive value
So to connect three and eight first we need to
find a parent node of element three index three has value
four it means that the parent node of element three is
four
So go to index four and check its value
It has minus three So it is a negative number
So element four is a parent node of element three here
element three is not a parent node
So in this case we need to compare the value
of indices four and eight to pick the Parent node the
value of index four is minus three and the value of
index eight is minus one
Here Element four has a higher number of nodes so
we need to pick four as the parent node and
connect Element eight with three to connect
Element eight with three just place the value three in
index eight
Now we need to update the parent node which is
four here
Subset four has three nodes already
Now we have added one more node
So changed it to minus four and that's it
So the logic of union operation is very simple
Find the parent node of each element next compare the
values based on weight and pick the parent node and
then connect the nodes and update the value of parent
node so let us
Quickly implement the weighted Union function
First let us write the void weighted union function which
takes three arguments the set array and two elements U
and V so write int arr int U int V
Next we need to find the parent node of each
element
So write int parent of U equal to find of
U and int parent of V equal to find of V
as we discussed earlier the find operation will return the
parent node of the given element
We will implement the find operation in the next video
As of now just assumed the find function will return
The parent node of each element
We have found the parents of each node
Now we need to compare the values of parent node
and picked the new parent node So write if array
of parent of U less than array of parent of
V and else block
We're making parent Node as negative value so the smaller value
will contain higher number of nodes
For example if array of parent of U is minus three and
array of parent of three minus one then array of
parent of U has the higher number of nodes
So we need to make array of parent of U
as the new root node
So in the if part we need to make array
of parent of U as root node and in the
else part we need to make array of parent of
V as the root node
Now let us implement a connecting logic in the if
part first let us update the root node value
If we connect two parents the new root node will
have some of all nodes
So write array of parent of U equal to array
of parent of U plus array of parent of V
here we are storing a new some value in array of
parent of U as it has the higher number of
nodes and then we need to connect array of parent
of V with the new root node here the root
node index is U So write array of parent of V
equal to U If the programme execution reaches the else
part which means parent of V has a higher number
of nodes we need to update the value of parent
of V so write array of parent of V equal
to array of parent of V plus array of parent
of U
And then we need to connect array of parent of
U with the new root node here the root node
index is V so write array of parent of U equal
to V That's it we have implemented logic for weighted
union function Now let us perform one more union operation
To understand the code better let us perform union operation
on elements one and eight Here the value of U
is one and the value of V is eight
Next we need to find a parent index of both
U and V first find a parent node of one
at index one
We have value as two which means one is not
a parent node and it is connected with element two
So go to index two and check its value
It's minus two it has a negative number
So it is a parent node so parent node element
one is two
Now find a parent node of eight
So the parent node of Element eight is four we
have found the index of parent of U and parent
of V Now we need to compare which one has
higher number of nodes
The value present in array of parent of U that
is array of two is minus two and the value
present in array of parent of V that is array
of four is minus four so it will check minus
two less than minus four which is false
So the control will reach the else part here
First the parent node will be updated array of parent
of V equal to array of parent of V plus
array of parent of U array of four equal to minus
four plus minus two which will become minus six
So the total number of nodes in the new set
will be six
Next we need
To connect these two nodes array of parent of you
equal to V that is array of two equal to
eight
So the value eight will be placed at array of
two
Here we aim to connect one and eight so let us check
Whether it is connected or not one is connected with
two and two is connected with eight
Eight is connected with four and index four has a
negative value
So it is a root node
So here elements one and eight are connected to the
same parent node four hence the elements one and eight
are connected to each other
Here we haven't directly connected elements one and eight
We have indirectly connected elements one and eight
So that's all
For this video In this video we have learned how
to represent disjoint set in an array and implemented
the union operation
In the next video we will learn how to implement
the find operation and  isConnected operation.